## Writing Waves Project Journal #3

As I mentioned in my last post, things slowed down. I wasn’t expecting all of March to require no updates, but it is what it is. After the second post guilt over not writing a third update quickly turned to relief turned to me forgetting it entirely. To my credit, there wasn’t much to write about. Things were ticking over slowly in the background.
I confess the project has been giving me a lot of stress. I didn’t have the time, energy, or desire to micromanage my editors, so I found myself not checking in at all, simply hoping my writers and editors were working together without reminder.
Thankfully, they were! A combination of slow moving writers, and a 3 week period where class was out or me or the teacher were not present means we are slightly behind optimal schedule, but by no means rushing. I was able to leap into action today, getting the team to update the spreadsheet to current status and putting together a list and action plan for the next two weeks so we can publish by the end of the year. 
This week, until 5/5 we are in the final round of editing, and the writers have been prompted to look out for last minute grammatical fixes and edits, as well as to make any last minute changes they desire. On 5/5 we will close editing and move to a proofing stage, giving ourselves a week to format, check and double check every piece, as well as arrange cover art, a works cited, and a final order and table of contents for the pieces. With that done the pieces can enter a final proofing phase, where they can be formatted and edited to ultimately be made into their final versions. On 5/12 we will have our last class meeting where we can make any final changes as a group and finally send off a final version to the teacher for website publication. 
In the background, my job is to lay the groundwork for this effort and make sure that we are making progress in class and not scrambling. Today I created and printed properly formatted verions of each piece (names and titles correct, works cited removed etc) that I can bring to class and we can use to get a feel for how we wish to format each piece. 
I’ve also created a list in the spreadsheet of all the tasks that need to be done before final publication, for both assignment of labor and credit.
I talked in the first journal about how I was worried about the number of copies required, and now further along in the process I think it will end up being four. The live edit copy, which will remain active until 5/5, a test copy which will exist alongside it in a non-final form to experiment with formatting (font, spacing, etc), and then a proofing copy, which will be for internal use only and will replace the live edit copy once the third round is over. This copy will be what we format for final use and will be run over with a fine tooth comb to catch any errors. Then, for internal consistency and so each step of the process contains it’s own linkable Google Doc, when we are totally satisfied with the proofing copy it will be duplicated into a view only doc which is the final copy. These will then be accessible to everyone and downloadable into pdf for final publication. 
I think this solution to the number of copies prevents any one doc from being forced to play multiple roles, while not creating confusion over which to use for each step in the process either. For a publication and team of this scale, I’ve hopefully engineered the optimal solution without causing too much drag on myself or the editing process. 
