## A Barbie Retrospective: Two Years Later

I’ll be honest, I am not a particularly attentive movie viewer. I can pick up themes, but only in retrospect. Small details slip my eye. Plot twists always work on me. I normally just let whatever I’m watching wash over me. But in the summer of 23’ when I watched the Barbie movie in theatres, I was sitting in rapt attention. The cultural discussion already brewing around Barbie was that there would be discourse (and there was some) and I wanted to be on top of it. 

So I sat, paying close attention and taking notes in my head, but I didn’t feel like I came out with much. Barbie, to its credit, is a much simpler movie than we all expected it to be. It’s ultimately a fable, it had a simple (but powerful) feminist message, simple and likeable characters and that was about it. The backlash against it was almost entirely fabricated culture war bullshit, the backlash to the backlash was built on the disgust to their disgust, and it all petered out pretty quickly. 

There was some discussion on the Ken’s, specifically Ryan Reynolds as Ken, how so much of the memes and discussion afterwards centered around them and not the Barbies. Again I think this is a little simpler than we all give it credit for. As much as we wanted to talk about Barbie, she’s a fairy tale character and that doesn’t leave a lot to work with. She starts the movie as a feminist, has a very short fall from grace, and ends again as a feminist (only with a little more nuance this time). It’s a good message, and one that certainly carries. But it doesn’t leave a lot of character growth latch on to. Ken meanwhile, is hilarious, and we get to see his struggle and his internal battle far more than we get to see Barbie’s. He ends the movie in a very different place than he started, and that journey is interesting to watch. 

Speaking of Ken’s, I don’t think it’s a valid critique to cite how they are treated by the Barbies as some sort of hypocrisy which invalidates the message of the film. Yes the Kens don’t have houses and all live outside, yes the Barbie’s treat them like objects, yes this is horrible. That’s because Barbieland is a matriarchy, and a mirror to the ways real society treats real women. That the Ken’s aren’t liberated at the end doesn’t matter because the movie ultimately is about female liberation. The Ken metaphor only needs to be taken as far as that, because delivering that message through the funhouse mirror of the Kens isn’t the point. The Kens are fine. They’re made of plastic.

But I want to talk about Allan. I think Allan, more than Barbie or Ken is the character most ripe for actual discourse. 

Can we start with the joke of Allan? 

It’s that he looks like Micheal Cera right? That he effectively is Micheal Cera?

This feels like an obvious point to me, but a lot of people I’ve talked to seem to disagree, they just can’t really articulate why. But I’m just not sure what else to take from Allan.

Can we meet in the middle here? The joke of Allan is that in a world of Ryan Reynolds and Simu Lius, he is a Micheal Cera. “There’s no one else like him”, and as much as that joke could be about his personality, it is also unavoidably about his looks. Micheal Cera is goofy and impossibly skinny and rides the line between ugly and handsome like he’s an Olympic skater, and yes, many people find Micheal Cera attractive and yes, he is a good guy, but he’s not Ken. Scott Pilgrim got an entire movie’s worth of comedy out of basically just that idea.  

So Allan is alone, and he’s not like the other Ken’s and there are a lot of boxes that could slot him into. He’s kind of the gay best friend, kind of the liberated man, kind of a non-binary figure in the heavily binarized Barbieland, kind of just the nerd, who is so harmless the idea of him having a sexuality can be forgotten. He could be any one of these, or none, and that isn’t really important because what Allan ultimately represents is men who do not fit in. Men who are in some way, not like the other Kens.

So, it’s weird to me the movie treats him the way they do. It’s weird to me that the culture at large treats Allan the way they do. When I went to the Vulture article “Let Us Salute the Unsung Hero of Barbie”, I expected ya-know, salutes and instead I got this: “While Ken’s personality is beach, Allan’s personality is empty sandbox. If Ken smells like a combination of Axe body spray, fragile masculinity, and boy sweat — and I believe, deep in my soul, that he does — Allan smells like non-spoiled 2 percent milk. Wait, non-spoiled milk doesn’t really smell like anything. Exactly.” 

Is this not a really fucking mean way to describe Allan? A character, who, by definition, has literally done nothing wrong. They do give him some credit, “To his credit, Allan becomes the Barbies’ only male ally once Gosling’s Ken brings the patriarchy to Barbie Land, flipping gender dynamics so that a bunch of insecure men who insist on singing shitty Matchbox Twenty songs are in charge of everything,” but even this praise falls flat. Even Allan’s feminism is framed as a failure to perform masculinity on his part, not a conscious choice. 

This is what nags at me with Allan’s character, what crime is Allan making up for by being an ally to the Barbies other than being pretty lame and uncool? The line that immediately proceeds that paragraph is “I don’t know if there’s a kickball league in Barbie Land. But if there is, Allan is always picked dead last.” Is that his crime? Being shitty at kickball?

I admit I’m probably projecting a lot here. In the world of Barbieland, I would be Allan. I have, in my life, been accused of all the boxes that Allan falls in. I was always picked last in kickball. I could easily be described as milquetost. When I read that Vulture article, I am reading back so many of the cruel things so many other people have said about me and that I’ve said about myself. I admit I don’t want it to bother me, but it does bother me the way my even my close female friends occasionally frame my feminism not as a conscious choice, but yet another way they see me failing masculinity. 

And I don’t think the Barbie movie does much to disagree with this reading. Allan is, throughout, a joke character. Even his hero moment is a joke. When he saves Barbie and Ken by pulling out martial arts prowess, again, the joke is that it’s funny and unexpected to watch Micheal Cera be physically competent right? Need I cite Scott Pilgrim again? 

I’m not accusing the Barbie movie or that Vulture article of misandry or anything (because misandry isn’t real). Instead, it just strikes me as a strange example of the Barbie movie completely failing to analyze or grapple with toxic masculinity, when it did such a good job doing just that otherwise. I was excited when I saw Allan, because I saw myself in him, but the movie did nothing to reward that interest. Allan is a joke, and disappointly for me, a joke because he isn’t enough of a man. Need I mention how the Barbies *like* Allan, but date the Kens? I’m aware how pathetic that statement comes across in writing, but it is true. 

He's a joke to the Kens, and a joke to the Barbies. He fails to perform masculinity; he’s clumsy and uncool and certainly not jacked, and his femininity is never rewarded. He’s just *there*. 

It would be... overly dramatic of me to call this erasure. Men, even lame and uncool men are certainly not dying for representation (citing Scott Pilgrim a third time). But looking back on how I felt leaving the Barbie movie, I don’t really have another term to draw on to describe what I felt. I saw myself in film, and the me I saw wasn’t balanced, or interesting, or nuanced. Instead, I saw myself puppeteered around in stereotype, given confirmation that all the worst things I believe about myself are, in fact, true. And worse, that other people see me that way too. 
