## Writing Waves Project Journal #1

This is the first entry in what I hope to become a short series of project journals for HCOM 412 Digital Publishing, also known as “the Writing Waves class.” After 5 weeks I have moved from unofficial production manager/editor in chief to officially taking on all the rewards (and burdens) of that position. 
I am writing this journal for 3 reasons. The first is that while I am eager to accept the challenge of running and producing a literary journal, I am simultaneously embarrassed at how much work I am taking on for what might not serve to actually advance my career. My hope is that by recording a record of my work and my progress I could prove to a potential employer that this class was a worthy addition to my resume.
The second is that a regular journal provides an excellent opportunity to fill my personal blog with writing, developing muscle memory to keep myself comfortable posting. 
Failing those two, my third reason is simply to keep a record for myself, to remember the challenges, the difficulties, the triumphs – what I did right and what I could do better next time. I hope to look back on the semester and be able to say that I have learned about myself and about leadership. 
Today was a busy day for me, although most of the class was not in attendance for our weekly session. Having finished the edits of our first batch of publications last night I was pleasantly surprised that the rest of the editing staff had as well and had plenty of thoughts to share. I did not have to create a weekly agenda, as our professor already had, although he did give me credit for suggesting the idea to him which I think means he likely would not have as soon.

I was officially appointed “production manager", having outcompeted the other candidate by sheer volume of my passion. I felt the first step I should take was making a spreadsheet to organize our work, which I developed for most of the class period, sharing it with the other teams as I did (we so far have a social media team, an editing team, and a policy team).  I have stuck primarily with the editing team, as that is my primary role in the class. 
The spreadsheet was another task I beat the professor too, as he showed me an old version he was planning to copy before I made one. I am happy to report my spreadsheet looks much nicer. (So far) it contains a list of all the submissions which have made it to our editing team, and the relevant information for each. Name of author, initial acceptance, etc. 
I am already predicting spreadsheet bloat, which I will need to deal with, but so far things are looking good. I am worrying about our editing process, I don’t want too many versions of each piece, but it feels like we need at least 2, maybe 3. At least one copy which is a “final” version that is either updated regularly or finished once rounds of editing are over, and then one running internal copy which our editors can go through and comment on unfiltered. I would also like to have one external copy, which exists between whatever editors are assigned to a piece and the writer in question so that the edits given will have a consistent voice. I worry though that 3+ copies will muddle the edits and leave things confusing. 
Top priority is a solid editing policy, not so much in voice but in procedure. We need- at least, a date where all the work is updated to the best of our ability, versions solidified and new edits sent out. This will likely be my focus next week if I can wrangle the editing staff.
My other role, and one I find myself shockingly comfortable in, is of delegator. The class is already looking to me as a leader and someone who can answer questions and I am trying to find the correct balance of enforcing my idea for the project and allowing/sometimes forcing others to contribute their own voices. So far I have approached this challenge by taking my role as editor as simply one of many, and then handling as much backstage work as possible, making things easier for the team. Way back in elementary school, I watched a video by the channel Extra Credits on the role of production manager, and it seemed like a dream job. I’m realizing that this is exactly what I’m doing.
So far I have made a google chat, updated the agenda, made a spreadsheet, organized links, and found email templates and I am generally trying to keep myself in the know with the actions of all the teams. When people come to me with tasks, I find myself simply pointing back and saying “how about you tackle that” which has been a success so far.
The biggest project, and one which thankfully has been working well is simply making sure all the teams are working off of the same information. I think it is far easier for me in a leadership role to simply work on solidifying rules and procedures than it is to captain the ship myself. 
This has been a long update. I expect next week’s to be smaller, as we tackle the second batch of submissions and make more final decisions which will not fall to me exclusively. 


